Welcome. Thanks for joining us. This is the PBC Morning Dawn study group at Padmasamyalang,
the Venerable Kempo Rinpoche's Monastery and Retreat Center in New York. This is the 17th
time we've done this discussion group on the Kempo Rinpoche's book, The Buddhist Path. This
is Chapter 17. It's entitled The Tantric Tradition and Terma, beginning on page 83 of that same
book.
So we'll begin with opening prayers like usual, and then we'll have the discussion. Thanks so
much.
[Tibetan chanting]
This is the supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava, which is the essential
and extraordinary view and doctrine of the early translation school. You keep alive and
spread by the light of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great Kempo, I pray at your Lord's feet.
In the palace of the Oakman, Dharma Daptu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three
times, the one who shows clearly the Dharmakāya of my own mind, we pray to the honourable
Rūpa Rūpa Rūpa, glorious in your future, the precious one, dwelling on the Lord's
seat on the crown of my head, hold me with your great kindness, nimisto the accomplishments
of body, speech and mind.
[Tibetan chanting]
So this is Chapter 17 in the Buddhist Path, Tantric Tradition in Therma, page 83. We'll
do a quick summary of the first half of the chapter and then go into the discussion. So
the Venerable Kumbhāramacās begin by defining the term tantra, as the tantra means continuity
and refers to the unchanging nature of the mind. The scriptures that teach about this
unchanging Vajra nature are called the Tantras, and the techniques used to directly reveal
the mind's nature are known as Tantrayana or Vajrayana.
They then go on to say that sometimes people ask if there is a difference in the role of
women and men in the Vajrayana Buddhism, and Rinpoche say that all people have the same
authority to become teachers and the same opportunity for realization. In the inner
Tantras the 14th root Samaya seems to honor and appreciate women even more than men. They
continue by saying Buddhism first spread from Tibet from India in the 5th century and continued
in the 8th century during the time of Guru Padmasambhava. This first wave of Buddhism
into Tibet is known as nimma or the ancient ones. In the 11th century a second wave of
Buddhism came to Tibet from India which is collectively known as Sarma, are the new schools
comprised of the Kalam Geluk, Kagu and Sakya traditions. All of these schools came from
the Buddha, teach Vajrayana Buddhism and are complete paths to enlightenment each with
their own lineages of masters and scholars. The nimma school in particular is made up
of the long oral lineage of Kama and the close revealed treasure lineage of Turma. Turmas
are teachings and objects hidden by Guru Rinpoche and Yeshay Sojal in Tibet in the 8th century
to benefit beings in the future. The wisdom to Kinney Yeshay Sojal was one of Guru Rinpoche's
nine heart disciples who achieved enlightenment in a single lifetime. Turma teachings were
mainly written down by Yeshay Sojal as instructed by Guru Rinpoche and were hidden throughout
Tibet and other countries through meditation power, often times without leaving the meditation
cushion at all. They were hidden in various places like inside rock mountains, underwater
in lakes and rivers, within glaciers and buildings and they were left as ritual objects as well
as actual Dharma teachings and sometimes these Turma were even hidden and revealed within
the mind streams of one of the 25 disciples of Guru Rinpoche. So that's the summary of
the first half.
So the first section to discuss is from page 83, the first paragraph and then page 85,
the first full paragraph. Tantra is a Sanskrit word that means continuity. Tantra refers
primarily to the unchanging nature of the mind which continues without interruption
from beginningless time until final enlightenment. The scriptures that teach the unchanging
nature of the mind are called the tantras and the means to directly reveal the mind's nature
are known as the tantrayana or the Vajrayana. Buddha Shakyamuni revealed many different
types and levels of teachings to suit the various capacities of students. The highest
section of his teaching is the Vajrayana which encompasses many practices such as the preliminary
practices, the creation stage and completion stage practices, Mahamudra and Dzogchen. Many
of the Vajrayana teachings of Guru Padma Sambhava were hidden in various parts of Tibet for
the sake of future generations. These hidden treasures are called Turma in Tibetan and
the people who reveal them are called Turtungs. The Turma treasures include texts and ritual
objects that were hidden by Guru Padma Sambhava and Lady Yeshe Sojal in Tibet in the 8th century.
Yeshe Sojal, one of Padma Sambhava's nine heart students, attained enlightenment in
one lifetime. Yeshe Sojal left signs of her accomplishment such as writing verses in solid
rock with her finger. I was thinking one thing that might be good to just kind of review
a little bit is Rinpoche's here talking about the tantrayana in relation to Buddhism and
the tantrayana Vajrayana and then kind of specifically go right to the Turma tradition
but maybe just also give if we just kind of review and remember just basically kind of
what what are the other traditions that are part of you know the Vajrayana Turma is one
that I thought maybe that would be a nice place to start just you know if we just kind
of collectively kind of just remember a little bit more about the other elements that make
us think about the practice speaking like the Kama lineage. That's one. I think because
I remember reading somewhere where there's a family that the Kama lineage was really
popular until the Turma lineage showed up because the Kama was like the spoken word
from a teacher to a student. Remember I read that one correctly? That's it. It was that
like that unbroken lineage. Of course it's two lineages. Yeah. Yeah. And then it was
like the Turma lineage was showing up what was it like two hundred years later or I mean
two hundred years after Kama is the mala or? Yeah. The Turma lineage began of course with
Guru Rinpoche but the first term was revealed by Sanjay Lingpah. Sanjay Lama sorry, my bad.
Sanjay Lama I think he was born in one thousand. So yeah. That's when the Turma lineage arose.
And it's not I think at that point I think Rinpoche say for about three hundred years
till about the 14th century Turma became very popular. And then it's popularity kind of
eclipsed the Kama meaning it began to get more emphasis by people revealing Turma and
then groups of students under those Turthans like practicing those specific teachings and
not practicing certain other Kama teachings. But the Kama teachings themselves went back
to Buddha Shakyamuni and then were passed all the way. I mean as Buddhism came into
Tibet from Guru Rinpoche then they were passed from like you said teacher to disciple and
then that disciple would apply the instruction become fully realized in that practice and
they become a holder of that lineage and they pass that orally on to their students as well.
So all the students of Guru Rinpoche during even this whole nimma like the official dates
of the nimma school from like 8th century into about the late 10th century or 11th century
was all actually Kama. So all the early masters in those 300 years or so were Kama lineage
holders and then the Turma started to be revealed. But Rinpoche say very clearly that Kama is
always the foundation of Turma. Turma is like an ornament of Kama and they always go
hand in hand really. I mean it all goes back to the Buddha and then Guru Rinpoche. In particular
between the lineages is there a distinction like is there creation stage and completion
stage in Kama or you only find that in Turma? Kama is like a lifeblood of the teachings
because that's the spoken word of the teacher from the mouth of the teacher to the ear of
the student. They say a long lineage of Kama and a short or close lineage of Turma and
they're all in those two. But the long lineage of Kama is like mainly what's been upheld
by like those six principal nimma, big nimma monasteries. That's what the instructions
that are passed down orally from the teacher to the student in practice. So Guru Rinpoche
said he says if you read, well I wish I had a quote here, in this like Kempo Rinpoche quote
in light of fearless and destructible wisdom, he said if you read the lineage history then
you'll find out just how important and beautiful the Kama, the Kama tradition is. So I guess
the other question that I have is besides how it's transmitted, is there a distinguishing
feature between the Kama and Turma lineages or is it just two versions of transmission?
I mean in terms of like the practices that are done? Are there practices or is it more
based on like meditation instruction? Is there, I mean, or is it really just, they both emphasize
the same type of practices, it's just that one was transmitted, you know, in the way that
Turma is transmitted, what was passed down from teacher to student. Yeah, the only experience
I have with Kama is one time I got very interested in the text chanting the names of Manjushri,
Manjushri Namasam Niti, and that's the first text in the Tantras collection of the Khandra,
that's the first text in the Tantras. And in the nimma Kama that has 46 volumes and I went
looking for things on there and there's a long commentary on chanting the names of Manjushri
by Pabasambhava. I found a short one by Gaurabh Dorje and a short one by Vimala Mitra. And
so those are all nimma. And I think maybe this characterization of Kama and Nima, Kama
and Turma is just within nimma because there's also many commentaries on chanting the names
of Manjushri in the new schools, too, in terms of I think Naroka wrote one and I can't remember
right now, but Alex Wayman has translated a text, a version of chanting the names of Manjushri,
which is based on seeing that text as a description of the mandala of Manjushri of all the deities
who are in the mandala, but then the ones that I was found in the nimma Kama were all
ocean commentaries. So it's like, I think maybe Kama is a little bit more commentaries. There's
more like teachings, but I don't know if there's commentaries in Turma as well or if Turma is more
like practices. Well, I was just going to say that that's something I mean, similar just like you
were saying that long lineage of Kama and close lineage of Turma, like what the specialness of
that is so like, so wonderful, like with the Turma being the close lineage, because it's
directly, it's directly from Guru Pichay and Nishi Sojal, you know, like it's, you know,
whether it's the mind Turma or the scripts or these objects that are found, which I think we're
going to talk about a little bit later in the chapter, but just that that's why it's close is
because it's, it's, it's exactly from them. There's no gap in terms of time, you know, whereas with
that long lineage, meaning that it's like you're saying from mouth to ear from teacher to student.
So I mean, again, it's unbroken, and both are unbroken. But there's like this, in terms of time,
there's this kind of option or availability for commentaries to come through in the Kama,
whereas, I mean, there are in the Turma too, I'm sure, but, you know, not as a still warm with the
Dakini's breath. It's still like hot off the press. So fresh. And I think that was part of, I think
,
what Padmasambhava gave those teachings, but, you know, all in share, I'm sure so many others
too, like that aspect of the skillful means of Padmasambhava and Yishisogel, just in that, I mean,
incredible seeing their wisdom mind so fast, really keeping this, these teachings going in their
current time to students which were transmitted, but then all these treasures that were like,
you know, these vast teachings given to like those assembled at that time. And then, you know,
knowing exactly the conditions and which one of those students, you know, are connected and are
going to be carrying, revealing the teachings in the future. So, and then when they are revealed in
the future, to that Turtang, who did, you know, reveals them, like Amanda was saying, just that
it's so fresh and it awakens all of those teachings in their own mind and heart, and then they put
them into practice. And then it's like really fresh and undiluted. Not that the other, other ones,
not that the Kama lineage is like diluted or anything, but it's just very fresh and like,
and appropriate for the time. And the people, the minds of the people, I mean, we're all human
beings
more or less the same throughout the ages, but you know, kind of particular to the different times.
Is this one of the things that did seem interesting? Particularly, you know, at first doing the
practices, it's more interesting. Oh, what's the, you know, what's the text actually saying? And
sometimes it's really fascinating when you start looking into like the descriptions that are also
left in there. You really see how, you know, this was tailored to this situation in this time.
It makes it very beautiful. Well, I guess that's not the part of it. It's another beautiful aspect.
Maybe that's another way of saying. It's another beautiful aspect.
I thought, I don't know if you guys would, I did find when someone in this Deuteronomy described
the Kama in term, I'm not really condensed. Do you want to hear that? He says, the teachings,
this is regarding the Kama from might of fearless and destructive wisdom. The teachings that were
passed on from mouth to ear in unbroken succession from Buddhist Sakyamuni or from Buddhist Samatab
hadra
up to your own Rūdvāma are known as the long lineage of Kama. The Kama teaching is vast and
profound containing fifth instructions for both sutra and tantra, but primarily for the three
divisions of the Nyingma inner tantras, do, ju, and sam. The sutra which gathers all the intentions
of ani-yoga, the secret essence tantra, the net of magical illusions, to the Gurya-garva of Maha-y
oga,
and the sende, longde, and ningate, or the vast, expansive mind and fifth instructions class of
zogchen or ata-yoga. So the three inner tantras, their seminal works. In woodblock form alone,
the number of tantras in the Kama teaching is over 440 volumes, and that number is far exceeded by
the Kama teachings recorded in handwritten form. From the sutra point of view, they contain
ganaya and bodhisattva teachings. From the tantra point of view, they contain Kriya-upa and yoga
teachings, and from the extraordinary Nyingma point of view, they contain the three inner tantra
teachings, Maha-yoga, Ama-yoga, and Ata-yoga. Then he goes on here. Therefore, this Kama teaching
is
the foundation and heart of the Nyingma school, and from ancient times it spread beautifully in
Tibet. Study the religious history of the Nyingma school and the biography of its masters, and you
will see why the Nyingma Kama is so important. The Nyingma teachings were preserved and spread
through group practice retreat, mandalas, sadhanas, fifth instruction, and oral explanation of the
gi-garva, etc. In brief, the activities of studying practice continued without decrease in central
Tibet at these six monasteries, six principal monasteries. And then there's just a short excerpt
on the term on the edge. He says, "For seeing the degeneration of the teachings and beings and
times
to come, Guru Rinpoche kindly hid an inconceivable number of treasure troves containing the Dharma,
wealth, blessings, substance, and so forth in glaciers, rocky mountains, lakes, and many other
places. When the time is right, turtons emanated, open the treasure doors, and spread the teachings
they contained. These teachings then are known as the close lineage of the termas. This lineage
comprises inconceivable pith instructions, yogic activities, and ritual practices of the creation
completion stages, connected primarily with kang-gong-pur-sum. From early on, and up to the present
,
more than 100 major and over 1,000 lesser turtons have appeared. And that three is the kaje,
the eight Haruka teachings, the first one, and the lama-gong-du, or teachings on the Guru, and then
the purva is like bhajra-kalaya. Those are some of the principal terma classes. What page is that?
I'm just talking here, I've seen it. 185 of the sisas that goes in the glossary. But I thought to
mention too,
that the terma is not a new precedent that just started up in the ninth century, like the prasana
parvita teachings and nagarjuna. Those are described as terma. The five treatises of
nitraya, you know, which were given to a sangha. Those are regarded as terma. So, and some people
regard the whole Buddha's teaching, which was concealed as terma. To Rott, my link post there,
that it's terma because it's concealed. It's a terma because it's hidden. It's a terma. And
that's the meaning of the teaching, is like the Buddha's teaching, can also be categorized
according to that. It's a treasure because it's concealed. It's a treasure because it is hidden.
It's a treasure because it is inexhaustible. It is a treasure because it fulfills needs and wishes.
Could you just read that one part again in the terma about what it was saying? It mentioned like
three things that are in there. One of them was rituals, because just in terms of that question
about whether there's actually commentary in the terma. It doesn't sound like from what he said,
at least in terms of ningma terma, that it's actually commentaries. As far as the calm of?
No, it was in the title of the terma, paragraph. Inconceivable with its instruction, yogic
activities
and ritual practices of the creation and completion. So, I guess if you include all those earlier
ones,
those are definitely commentaries like Maitreya's text or commentaries. Like that ongoing
exposition
of the fundamental sutras and patras, that's the calm of any of them. All the way up to the present
day.
If I could say one thing about the commentaries, I heard isn't the long-chain ning dig a commentary
terma on all the ningma ningjig and the calm of ningjig? I think that's Longchepa's text that,
what is it, the ning-ting yao-shi? That that's the two of those, in terms of the name Longchen ning
and long-chain ning-ting. But I did just recently read that the long-chain ning-ting was revealed
by
Jigme Lingpa in the 18th century. But it has some text of Jigme Lingpa's own writings in it as well
,
that it's not just the things that came to him from Longchenpa, but it has some of his own writings
.
I just thought I'd throw that in. But what you're thinking of, when we were talking about Longchen
pa,
having written commentaries on the conro, that that was part of his greatness is bringing together
those texts.
I'll just do the summary quick and then we'll do that. So halfway through the chapter,
the Rinpoches continue saying that, "Turma can only be revealed through the meditative power of t
urtons.
There are 108 great turtons and a thousand lesser turtons, all of whom are reincarnated masters of
the 25 disciples of Guru Rinpoche. They are extraordinary awakened beings who receive
teachings and blessings directly from Guru Rinpoche. They have incredible powers due to revealing
their
inner wisdom. Turtons are able to find the turma and reveal them without much difficulty. For
example,
after they've made the indicated preparations, the turma arrives to the turma spot,
and sometimes a rock will suddenly open by itself, and then the turton will remove a container
holding
the turma. In addition to Dharma texts, turma can be ritual objects like badras, bells, purbos,
statues, and blessed clothing. All of these items are used to establish a fresh, living connection
to Guru Padma Sambhava, the Buddha, and one's innermost nature of mind. The turma texts are very
unusual and awe-inspiring. Sometimes they are small yellow scrolls that cannot burn or be
easily damaged. The teachings are written in symbolic Dakini script, which are not Tibetan
language. Turtons can look at a few of these letters of Dakini script and through their inner
wisdom reveal even volumes of teachings from them exactly word for word as Guru Rinpoche originally
concealed them. There are many turma in Tibet, and they are very special. They even give protection
from harm to those who wear them. Even in present day, turmas continue to be revealed and practiced
.
So the second point for discussion comes from that last paragraph on page 86.
The turma texts are very unusual. They are small pieces of yellow paper rolled into tight scrolls.
If you put these rolls of paper into a fire, they will not burn. These teachings are written
in a special language called the symbolic language of the Dakinis. These scrolls have just a few
small signs, which are not Tibetan letters, but when the turtons look at the letters,
they can transcribe long books from them. There are many of these hidden treasures in Tibet,
and they are considered very special objects. Even in present day Tibet,
great turtons continue to reveal the term of treasures.
Well, I read in the book, I think, Vajra Essence, and it's about the
Dajjumtursar, the part that's, I think, more on Shimatha-type teachings. It was in the introduction
,
I think, that said Dajjumlingpa, the turton of the Dajjumturma, said he downloaded the
term from the Dharmakaya. So I wondered how that could be explained for the, or how that fits into
this description of terms. That process of how the turton discovers the object, and then from the
writing gets the whole text. Yeah, or, I mean, it sounded a little bit different to download
something from the Dharmakaya, or to get a translation. I think that was the editor's commentary,
although I don't think they necessarily had that word "download". But it's something we can relate
to
in our own vernacular, in our own experience. That choice of word. That choice of words of download
.
I think it relates, like, I mean, on the study guide, if you look on the back, there's the
term lineage terms, and it just lists, I mean, in the chapter two, they talk about this, but just
those three types of terma, the earth or land terma, the mind terma, and the pure vision terma.
So I think, in that case, the downloading from the Dharmakaya, maybe he was referring,
meaning that the mind terma, like, really, that's my guess. Did you know that if that terma is my
terma? I think it's a mind terma. Yeah, I think so. That would fit. Because he had a, I think he
had a,
and they don't know if this is getting off course, but I think it's like he went to pure land and
received the teachings there, I think. So, yeah, but I really, I'm resting in memory of.
Maybe it'd be good to elaborate on the difference between mind terma and pure vision terma, then,
because, I mean, I remember hearing about mind terma before, but I'm not sure I'm really used
to hearing it referred to as pure vision terma. I feel as though, I seem to remember having read
that that's more when, like, there's like a vision of a deity that really comes and, like, speaks,
you know, speaks to teaching directly. That's what I, right? And that's the pure vision one?
That's the pure vision. Okay. And then the mind terma is just really, like, more like that
Dharmakaya, and, like, really, that the teaching just comes. So rises. The causing condition comes
the right moment, and then the teaching, or recollected, is sometimes people say the another
version, where the turtan remembers their past life, and the teaching comes that way.
It's so beautiful how it's a, it's such an unbroken transmission, like you were saying,
Guru Pauline Sambhava was the reincarnation of Buddhist Shakyamuni, and then his direct disciples
reincarnated as turtons, and those turtons, and he specifically entrusted specific teachings for
specific moments of time to be revealed by those exact practitioners when the, you know, entrusted
to the Dakinis and the guardians, and then when they were reborn in a different incarnation,
that time comes about. Like, one example, Jossi Shanthantayet, I think, and he received a
terma prophecy, maybe you guys remember that better than I, but he said, "Oh, there will be,
you know, there could be fires in Lhasa, you know, you should specifically reveal this terma
at a specific time." That's what this protector told Jossi Shanthantayet, and he didn't really
pay much attention, he didn't really do that. And then there was fire in Lhasa, and there was
damage. Later, it said, he got another kind of prophecy, and it said, "If there's going to be
flooding, you should reveal the terma to avoid the flooding in Lhasa and essential to that."
Then he said, "Oh, this time, really, I'm going to do that." So he did, and he revealed the terma,
and he did the practices and specifically avoided the flooding which Lhasa was prone to because of
its location, and totally dispelled that obstacle. That's because Guru Pauline Sambhava, I mean,
the point is that he knew exactly what was going to happen in the future and how things were going
to happen. And the balance of the causes and conditions, too. Like, it's not, because even
too, there's so many stories where, like, we saw someone for something where one little thing's a
little bit off, and not all the terma was actually even revealed, or, I mean, there's other
instances,
too, with the dark red and the blended, to some degree. Yeah, I just think we should be careful
at that time, a little bit, with how many, it's such a big subject. And also, maybe,
some people may not be as particularly knowledgeable of what we're referencing, so there might be a
lot. But, I mean, the take home point that seems like a terma is that it's specifically a teaching
for a specific time based on, you know, certain things have happened in those several hundred years
.
At this time, when the barbarians come and they, or whatever, you know, you should reveal and
practice
this teaching, which is particularly good to dispel these obstacles at that time. It's just so deep
and profound, you know, it's like, and anyone who doesn't believe in the vastest of the nature,
being so deep and profound, if they come in contact with the terma teachings, you know, it's like,
you must dispel that, you know, to help. That's what everybody says, who actually sees someone
reveal a terma, or you practice that teaching, and you see how it dispels the...
Just that blazing, like, the wisdom of Padmasambhava's bodhicitta, and that, and then these
practitioners of turtons, just that, yeah, so powerful, so blazing, so perfectly, like,
medicine. I have a quick question. I'm sorry, but just to put, and then too, like you kind of were
referencing too, I mean, not, there's the Dharma, this, like, pure, blazing, beautiful, just all
these teachings and these skillful, these practices, which really catalyze kind of that realization
in
one's own mind and heart, and then, like, this display in a way too, like in the terma tradition,
how you think Padmasambhava, Keshisojala, and the students assembled, just that, you know, through
their meditation power, you know, Keshisojala recalls the entire teaching, you know, this is
probably
days and days of teaching from Padmasambhava, right, or who knows their state of realization,
like I'm human, and she completely remembers flawlessly the whole teaching. She puts it in
calligraphy on a scroll of paper, like the whole thing, and then through their wisdom and their
meditative ability, their realization of how flexible all this apparent things is, like,
seal it, like, without moving from that cushion, like, all over these different locations,
including
space and, like, in the minds, and then, like you said, in the future, when these times would come,
where some of the Turtons would reveal them secretly, but then sometimes they would know,
they would know when to go and where to go, and they would actually say,
I'm going to go reveal this, and you read some of those descriptions, like in Blazing Splendor,
or, you know, where people who very recently, they remember going and seeing, like, you know,
the rock, like, open up, and these really hot objects coming out, and, or, I mean, that's just,
you know, I mean, just like that, where even for, there has to be, I guess there must be,
there's connection with everyone and one's own devotion, but to think, you know, to just have
that connection, to actually see, for example, a rock open up, and, like, all these objects come
out that are, like, so hot, they'll, like, burn, you know, burn cloth and things, you know, or
something,
that's not, not your ordinary thing for a lot of us, but not to mention
what's actually in that treasure, like, what, you know, it's not just the pump and circumstance,
but just that gets the attention, and, like, for those with devotion even increases it more,
so I think for us to even think about that whole lineage of, like, what, how they, how it happened,
and how the term came, and it's very, for our own, like, kind of hearts and minds, kind of
softening and opening and appreciating, so inspiring. One of the things I remember appreciating,
too, I was reading through Brilliant Moon, and it was, at one point, Dougal Kinsey was talking
about
how he had revealed this one particular term, and he was, you know, he had seen them on this mand
ala,
kind of displayed on a lake, and he was going into this, to this particular temple, and then he,
he sees the statue, like, reaches up the sleeve and pulls up, you know, this temple, which is
going, you know, it's like, that statue wouldn't have been around, so then you're really starting
to realize, you know, how flexible everything is. It's not like, you know, they, they went to a
rock,
and, you know, I mean, many times, yes, they did, but, you know, other times it's like, well,
that's not quite there yet, but we know what that's going to be in a certain place at this time,
you know, and it's just kind of, it's just, okay, wow, yeah, not really, really spectacular.
Well, I have to set a quick question, just kind of, you know, you hear a lot about the,
the term of being such a big aspect of thin Anima lineage, and I just wondered if anyone wanted to
say something about just how the other schools of Tibetan Buddhism see the terma, and kind of how
they relate to it, and talk about it. I mean, I think it's, that seems as though there's terma
teachings in all the schools, but such a huge part of the Ninma school. Anyone have any to say
about
that? The only person I can think of that was not Ninma is the fifth Dalai Lama, is renowned as
being
a teretan, but, but I don't know. I think this, I mean, I think Kimbo Sairam, which I recently said
is only Saketrasen, one of his famous reincarnations, was a great teretan, all-way teretan, or I
forget
his name exactly, and that one of his, his great termas was a red tara, like a specific term of
practice of red tara, which now is long as Saketrasen, which is like so renowned for holding.
But maybe then I'll just, just with the other schools, how they view the terma teaching, the
terma lineage. I know that all of you is like Guru Rinpoche as being a profound enlightened
wisdom being, like a Buddha, and I mean, that's for sure. I mean, Rinpoche has definitely said
how they've all, of all these lineage masters have had some direct communication, and been inspired
,
if not directly personally blessed, by Guru Padmasambhava at some point in their lives,
whether it's in a vision or a dream or direct perception. And so in terms of that, like the
terma being the direct activity of Rinpoche, I think there's not any kind of a contradiction
there at all, for sure, between the lineages. I mean, it's...are they practicing terma? Do you know
? Yeah, like the Tibetan book of the dead, quote unquote, everyone practices that, and that's a
really famous term of karma like that. So,
many different vajra kalaya practices too, from the kamma and terma, all the schools. And then Raga
Aseng, like this great kamma, like all those schools, Nyingma Master, Tertan.
There are Tertans in the other schools, not just the Nyingma. Yeah, the kagyu too. I think the kag
yu and the nyingma especially too, are especially closely,
many Nyingma and kagyu monasteries are both Nyingma and kagyu, including Riwacei, where Kenya and
Virginia.
But there was just a quick side note on your question, like there was definitely a time where
there was a lot of false Tertans, which they said many people proclaiming that they had
"Oh, this is a terma" and everything, so then there was like a Jangung cultural, the great,
the first cultural in the 1900s, and other teachers wrote, "Oh, how do you distinguish between
authentic Tertan and a non-authentic Tertan, and terma and this and that?" Like one example,
Chogya Lingpa, one of the great Tertans of the 19th century, so renowned, close friend and student
and
teacher of Jangung cultural in the first kensei, who was one of the greatest Tertans ever, you know
,
all different, seven types of transmission. Anyway, he helped. But he could hardly read,
he said Chogya Lingpa. But he couldn't write, I don't think. Yeah, he couldn't write, so they would
come, but then he would reveal the most majestic, profound terma, sometimes in front of hundreds
of people, and so the cultural in kensei were just like, "This one, you know, he's just amazing how
he
can't write, but he's like total, you know, revealing his entire scope of the teachings."
But anyway, generally, I think they say like the practice is in the pudding. If that teaching leads
you to have like more bodhicitta, more wisdom, more compassion, all those different things,
it leads to that result, and that's a good sign that, you know, that it's authentic.
[Music]
[BLANK_AUDIO]